Micrometer monitoring blog (#410)
kiegroup/optaplanner-website: content/blog/2021/10/12/MonitorTheSolver.adoc

Additionally, you can also check how long each solver ran.
If a solver ran abnormally long or short, there might be an anomaly that should be investigated.
You might also want to check if the solver threw any errors. Perhaps the issue is caused by bad data being passed to the solver.

== Connecting monitoring systems to OptaPlanner

OptaPlanner uses https://micrometer.io/[Micrometer] to collect its metrics.
Micrometer then sends the metrics to different monitoring systems using _registries_.
Every monitoring system supported by Micrometer has its own registry.
In Quarkus, to connect OptaPlanner to https://prometheus.io/[Prometheus], you would add its extension as a dependency in the `pom.xml`:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-micrometer-registry-prometheus</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

In Spring Boot, add the Spring Boot actuator to your project along with the registry dependency:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
    <artifactId>spring-boot-starter-actuator</artifactId>
</dependency>
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.micrometer</groupId>

>     <artifactId>micrometer-registry-prometheus</artifactId>

Reviewer: Nitpicking: we use 2-space indentation for XML everywhere.

== Starting Prometheus

Prometheus has a prebuilt Docker image on Dockerhub that can be used for running Prometheus.
We'll need to modify its configuration so it'll scrape our metrics endpoint.

Create the `prometheus.yml` file with the following text:

[source,yaml]
----
scrape_configs:
- job_name: local application
  scrape_interval: 1s
  metrics_path: /q/metrics
  static_configs:
  - targets:
    - localhost:8080
----

This configures Prometheus to scrape metrics from `localhost:8080/q/metrics` every second.

Start Prometheus with the preceding configuration:

[source,bash]
----
docker run \
    --network host \
    --mount type=bind,source=prometheus.yml,destination=/etc/prometheus/prometheus.yml,ro=true,relabel=shared \
     prom/prometheus
----

You can see the Prometheus UI by visiting http://localhost:9090.

image::PrometheusUI.png[Prometheus UI]

== Starting Grafana

https://grafana.com/[Grafana] provides a much more robust UI with additional features.
Grafana has a prebuilt image on Dockerhub that you can use to run Grafana locally. Start it using the following command:

[source,bash]
----
docker run --network host grafana/grafana
----

It might take a while to start.

> After it starts, visit http://localhost:3000 to see the Grafana UI. Login with the username "admin" and the password "admin".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After it starts, visit http://localhost:3000 to see the Grafana UI. Log in with the username "admin" and the password "admin".
```

== Connecting Grafana to Prometheus

. Click the Gear icon to go to the Configuration page.
. Click the "Add data source" button.
. Select "Prometheus".
. Enter "http://localhost:9090" for the URL field.
. (Optional) Set the Scrape Interval to be equal to the one set for Prometheus (1s).
. Click "Save & Test".

If it is set up correctly, a green textbox will appear above "Save & Test" with text "Data source is working".

image::GrafanaConfigurePrometheus.png[Grafana Prometheus Configuration]

== Create a dashboard to monitor metrics

With all that setup, we can finally graph some metrics.

. Click the "+" icon on the left sidebar.
. Click "Add an empty panel".
. Beneath "A", in the text box to the right of "Metrics", enter "optaplanner_solver_solve_duration_seconds_active_count". This adds a graph for the number of active solvers. It might say "No data" if no solvers were started yet.

> . Click the clock icon in the top right, and select "Last 15 minutes" under "Relative time range". This make the dashboard show data that occurred during the past 15 minutes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click the clock icon in the top right, and select "Last 15 minutes" under "Relative time range". This makes the dashboard show data that occurred during the past 15 minutes.
```
